<cite>This overview was written for [Eleanor's Iceberg](http://newsletter.eleanorkonik.com/), a weekly newsletter with my nerdy research into history, infrastructure, and weird science! Please consider signing up & supporting my work.</cite>

> My work-in-progress novel [[Temple Mage|Temple Mage]] was inspired by a documentary I showed my students about Egypt. It touched on the [political crisis](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc5NTQ3MzAxMjE4MjI3MzcyJmM9bTljNiZiPTM4MDg2NTA2NCZkPXYwbDdjNG8=.M1n5IAGZS08yLTSWQbvbLWnmNUyWY3U0OOwaJ5i0gOI) between [[Egypt]] and [[Ethiopia]] over the environmental impact of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
> 
> In [[Temple Mage|Temple Mage]], the dam's creation isn't announced, so I had to figure out what clues would be noticed downstream in a region where flooding is seasonal, since the water level dropping wouldn't happen in a meaningful way.

## Fun Facts

*   Unstable rivers (i.e. ones that aren't dammed) are more likely to have sandbars. 
*   Stable rivers have more riverbed vegetation like reeds because unstable flows don't scour the roots. 
*   Dams that release from the bottom instead of the top (like modern hydropower dams) significantly disrupt the _temperature_ of the river by making it significantly colder, which impacts the fish. 
*   Plankton is more likely to grow downstream in a dammed river because the sediments that block light get stuck in the dam's reservoir. 
*   More erosion happens in the deltas of dammed rivers because there's no sediment to replace what gets washed downstream.

## Flow Volume Matters

River flow volumes impact the reproduction and growth of aquatic species the way seasonal temperature variations in the air trigger changes in deciduous trees. [Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc5NTQ3MzAxMjE4MjI3MzcyJmM9bTljNiZiPTM4MDg2NTA2NyZkPXA1eTlmNHk=.EsSzxShF1ZHxiU6PyTPcmdUfD-5faJ08Me37yXEuF2k)

## Crop Yields are Variable

Dams often underperform their projected agricultural impact evaluation because it's hilariously hard to predict the value of future commodities. Ask any economist -- or a stockbroker. [Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc5NTQ3MzAxMjE4MjI3MzcyJmM9bTljNiZiPTM4MDg2NTA3MyZkPW0zcTBqOGk=.Q3ysUnM3Y6y1gzH-UJEX60RvUWR4_b3_K4zYDvVI4Ng)

## [[Egypt]] has Nothing Like Salmon

Most salmon are "anadromous." They hatch in freshwater, migrate to the ocean, then return to fresh water to reproduce. It's one of the reasons dams are problematic for them, and why salmon runs exist. (Note: the Nile has few, if any, anadromous fish.) [Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc5NTQ3MzAxMjE4MjI3MzcyJmM9bTljNiZiPTM4MDg2NTA3NiZkPXY3ajVkNWM=.GACL1ne-YYId-MACGhBN3GL4g_7I6_KvO4O2-UuLr_w)

## Lungfish are Weird

The African lungfish requires special fishing techniques to hunt. It is native to Ethiopian wetlands and inhabits the seasonal wetlands. During the dry season, where it lies dormant in the soil after swampy lake beds dry up. It's “hunted” insted of netted like most fish in the Nile. [Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc5NTQ3MzAxMjE4MjI3MzcyJmM9bTljNiZiPTM4MDg2NTA3OSZkPXU5dDF4MXc=.y8E6OJZIyn6H3Phbgb00TPjFOLED_O6kyEsj1qXyJVs)

 