<cite>This overview was written for [Eleanor's Iceberg](http://newsletter.eleanorkonik.com/), a weekly newsletter with my nerdy research into history, infrastructure, and weird science! Please consider signing up & supporting my work.</cite>

According to [Paula Munier](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc0NDczODU5NDgxNjA1MjQ0JmM9dTZmNSZiPTM3NzEzNzI0MyZkPXk0czBlOHI=.Nb0cJ8c6lQWQks0m_z3_zSEKXtSKE-6o8NxmVa0ubFY), an agent I once met at New York Pitch, one of the top changes editors request is:

**"Can you give the heroine a dog?"**

I decided to get ahead of the game and start integrating pets into my plotlines from the get-go (for example, giving [[60 Characters/b. ATA 100-199/Irella]] a [[Monche Prairie]] hound). But since I generally write speculative fiction, I wanted to know a little bit more about domestication before I tossed a dog into a world with [[Bronze Age]] technology. Here's what I learned...

## Fun Facts

*   Cabernet Sauvign is the most widely planted wine grape cultivar in the world.
*   Neanderthals made paintings, ate cooked barley, and had advanced tools.
*   A third of an urban fox's diet is scavenged. 
*   Male chimpanzees patrol their territorial borders in large groups and attack lone chimps from neighboring communities.
*   Female bonobos form strong coalitions—partly based on sex with each other—that keep a lid on male violence.
*   The hippopotamus is the world's deadliest large land mammal, killing an estimated 500 people per year in Africa.
*   Zebras have a ducking reflex, which makes them harder to lasso than horses.
*   Zebras don't have a family-based hierarchy system. 
*   Only 13 animals were domesticated by early human societies. 

## Sex and Wine

Grapes in the wild generally have male and female vines. But the process of domestication selected for the relatively rare genetic trait of hermaphroditism, which makes cultivation easier. [Read more.](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc0NDczODU5NDgxNjA1MjQ0JmM9dTZmNSZiPTM3NzEzNzI0NiZkPWcyaTVsNGs=.6tfRi6evL-8xQ3SDiL7olJpHUzDJ43J_ND06W3Wkze4)

## Foxes are the New Dogs

Urban foxes are showing the physical signs of domestication, but we didn't breed them on purpose. Their brains are smaller than their wild counterparts -- but they're friendlier, which keeps them alive. [Read more.](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc0NDczODU5NDgxNjA1MjQ0JmM9dTZmNSZiPTM3NzEzNzI0OSZkPXY0cDF5OGs=.tvPHrr5ylo2IRK7NH8S6O22fgt0_3ryGT3CWCoO78uI) 

## Violence is Genetic

Isolated populations of apes and monkeys sometimes manage to breed out violence by sexually selecting males who _don't_ patrol territory so they can beat up on the neighbors.  [Read More.](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc0NDczODU5NDgxNjA1MjQ0JmM9dTZmNSZiPTM3NzEzNzI1MiZkPW0wdDVlOGw=.IQ4bFaAw5lRRZBHirrEuTKSGVKMEEMs2HQpfi5UdUKI)

## The Four Fs

Domestication works best when an animal is: friendly, feedable, fecund, fast-growing, and family-oriented. Farm animals like goats are domesticated. Circus animals like elephants are _tamed_. [Read More.](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDc0NDczODU5NDgxNjA1MjQ0JmM9dTZmNSZiPTM3NzEzNzI1NSZkPXE3Zjl6N24=.V8rzfm8U7WxSBl0kFwvrZtXdydFypfOTUUfnbr_huAI)

# Notes

* Relevant to the [[Monche Prairie]] [[domestication]] of the [[2020.11.30 Onager|onager]] and wolves. 

 