---
alias: inbreeding, inbred dynasties
---

<cite>This overview was written for [Eleanor's Iceberg](http://newsletter.eleanorkonik.com/), a weekly newsletter with my nerdy research into history, infrastructure, and weird science! Please consider signing up & supporting my work.</cite>

> Someone on r/AskHistorians asked about why students learn about the [the Hapsburgs](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDY5NDAzOTc4NzI1ODU2OTQ4JmM9YTdhMyZiPTM3MzUxMjMyNSZkPWcyejB0Mmg=.YQBUdUgbIPkQd7D0YjyaBY8TNgNAtOSX2Lho4keWQ58), but not [[Egypt|Egyptian]] examples of inbreeding. Check out what I learned while sourcing my response and planning an article about creating fictional worlds with inbred dynasties. 

## Fun Facts

*   King Tut had a "juvenile aseptic bone necrosis" which made it hard for him to walk.
*   Stillbirth was a common consequence of royal inbreeding. 
*   Despite 300 years of inbreeding, the Ptolemys didn't really have any major genetic issues. 
*   Elissa of [[Phoenician|Tyre]] (aka [[Dido]]) was married to her uncle. 
*   [[Incan]] princes often married their sisters.

## Genetics is Probabilistic

Incestuous dynasties were were common in ancient [[Egypt]], Hawaii, the [[Incan]] Empire, pre-industrial Thailand, Phoenicia and several African realms. \[[Source](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDY5NDAzOTc4NzI1ODU2OTQ4JmM9YTdhMyZiPTM3MzUxMjMzNyZkPWY4ZzdpM3o=.hU-jPfb-pUMjuU8jYMGjlL7Vhiu5CgAy6oLGTrP-Ub8)\]

## Siblings or Cousins?

Incestuous European dynasties like the Hapsburgs tended to marry their cousins, whereas more ancient marriages tended to be between siblings. \[[Source](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDY5NDAzOTc4NzI1ODU2OTQ4JmM9YTdhMyZiPTM3MzUxMjM1MiZkPXA1cDZwNHk=.gGA8mPQBdOU59q_vto5zbTy8AZdR4BPyI2qo144S9kM)\][](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDY5NDAzOTc4NzI1ODU2OTQ4JmM9YTdhMyZiPTM3MzUxMjM2MSZkPWY5YzFnNWk=.22RBWmwILhmfqicKqj2VY6qaEJxK_lFFh7vSQ4VlcR0)

## Who Rules Next?

While yes, varieties of sibling marriage were common in [[Egypt]], so was polygamy and the products of incestuous marriages were not typically the heir. \[[Source](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDY5NDAzOTc4NzI1ODU2OTQ4JmM9YTdhMyZiPTM3MzUxMjM3MCZkPWoxcjFqNHg=.2sR0n5Jejh-hjz9kEVs6LhePEJuZ61nc5LTSxa0EmKI)\]

## Meeting Times

Marriages between individuals who grew up together young age are typically sexless due to something a type of sibling avoidance called the Westermarck effect. \[[Read More!](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNDY5NDAzOTc4NzI1ODU2OTQ4JmM9YTdhMyZiPTM3MzUxMjM4MiZkPWg0bzRzNGY=.NYRBREdyKVyExbaHeoIgnvKmVke-ycEymnphyxlyGu8)\]

---

# Further Reading

## The Hapsburgs are famous for their defects due to inbreeding. This must also be true for ancient Egyptian royalty who routinely married their siblings, but if that is the case, why have I never heard of it?

*(question via [[rAskHistorians|r/AskHistorians]], my answer below)*

To answer your _actual_ question, you haven't heard of it because the context the Habsburgs come up in is generally a critique of European monarchy from a modern political standpoint. Since the US didn't fight any wars against Ancient [[Egypt]] and there haven't been any modern revolutions overthrowing ancient Egyptian dynasties, it wasn't relevant to any particular point your educators were making at the time. \[Source: am an educator, make decisions like this all the time.\]

To answer your implied question, yes, Egyptian royalty practiced inbreeding and it did have an impact. Although stillbirths, genetic defects and disorders were definitely common \[[Source](https://www.medicalbag.com/home/features/grey-matter/impact-of-royal-inbreeding-part-iii/)\], it's important to remember that inbreeding exacerbates "bad recessives" (I'm oversimplifying wildly, I'm not a geneticist, but work with me here) and if you start out with a clean enough gene pool and have enough kids to work with, you can wind up with a situation like the Ptolemaic dynasty, where Cleopatra was the result of a long line of inbreeding to keep the Macedonian bloodline pure, but didn't suffer any particular ill-effects from inbreeding. For example, a lot of dog breeds are really, really inbred, but although there are situations like how dalmations are prone to hip dysplasia, that doesn't mean that _all_ modern purebreds are disease-ridden incompetents.

That said, about 10 years ago the Egyptian government gave scientists permission to do DNA studies on royal mummies, and it revealed that King Tut (whose parents were siblings) had a disorder called juvenile aseptic bone necrosis, which leads to bone damage as you might expect from the name. \[[Source](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/king-tut-dna/)\]

 