---
alias: sewers
---

<cite>This overview was written for [Eleanor's Iceberg](http://newsletter.eleanorkonik.com/), a weekly newsletter with my nerdy research into history, infrastructure, and weird science! Please consider signing up & supporting my work.</cite>

> The [[60 Characters/b. ATA 100-199/Irella|protagonist]] of my [[Bronze Age]] [[Civil Mage|fantasy novel]] mostly uses her magic for civil engineering projects, so when she has to deal with a clogged sewer in order to prevent plague from hampering the city's siege defense... I needed to learn more about ancient sewer systems. 

## Fun Facts

*   Ancient [[Mesopotamia|Mesopotamians]] used bitumen to plug leaks in irrigation and sewage systems. 
*   Poor Babylonians used the streets as sewers, which were periodically re-paved with clay. 
*   Wealthy Assyrians had 15sqft brick-lined bathrooms with drainage systems.
*   The palace of Sargon the Great had seated toilets with drains that discharged into a main sewer line. 
*   Ancient Egyptians used clay sewer pipes to drain portions of the Nile River Valley. 

## Copper Pipes

[[Egypt|Egyptian]] pyramids from 4,500 years ago had sophisticated copper drainage systems. \[[Read more!](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA5OTg3Mzg1NTA3NTgzOTE0JmM9eDZyNCZiPTQwODI1MjA0NCZkPWsxaTRoNG0=.154XZ-l2oHFwhPtXqDfLpQhZlDnvEZi7M5VnGqk2-H8)\] 

## Separating Sewage

The [[Aztecs]] dealt with sewage through a complex filtration system similar to modern septic tanks. \[[Read more](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA5OTg3Mzg1NTA3NTgzOTE0JmM9eDZyNCZiPTQwODI1MjA0NyZkPWU4cThpM2w=.yL7eYScXo72iccvhdcL2xe-dpAfWhv0nrW1VkmumC1s)!\] [](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA5OTg3Mzg1NTA3NTgzOTE0JmM9eDZyNCZiPTQwODI1MjA1MCZkPXQ2azdxN24=.ITaopmBPH9XQXBiee7GqCxmuwKIExyh-FxUahsvMnXI)

## Public Latrines

[[Roman]]-era Corinth had communal toilets with running water in channels underneath the seats in order to flush away waste water. \[[Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA5OTg3Mzg1NTA3NTgzOTE0JmM9eDZyNCZiPTQwODI1MjA1MyZkPXU0ZTNmNHA=.9GNYazXcd-uBARdohVQ67OqWF35rdxUx-6xRuNsM_x0)!\]

## Perfect Pavers

Ancient [[40 Slipbox/41 Indexes/China|Beijing]] used super-absorbent pavers, along with underground culverts, to deal with stormwater management. \[[Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA5OTg3Mzg1NTA3NTgzOTE0JmM9eDZyNCZiPTQwODI1MjA1NiZkPWE0dThkMGI=.zSXKH-S6_3N7TENyWNr8fMa3J9XhhrtckHLYZxWytf8)!\] 

<div class=infobox>If you found this interesting, you may also enjoy </div>

---

See also:
* [[silk was used as a measure of value#Maya plumbing First pressurized water feature found in New World https www sciencedaily com releases 2010 05 100504155421 htm|2021-01-02 > Maya Aqeducts & Fountains]]


 