* 100 BV - 50 BV: The royal houses of the maritime empires along the seacoast begin adopting mages into their households in order to hold onto power as mages, considered the "children of the gods" begin emerging as political powers.
* 30 BV - 0 BV: Widely regarded as a god, a violet mage known as Valor emerges from the desert, having enslaved several other mages and turned them into *shahem*, animals with magic he is able to control and extract the power from. He conquers the fertile lands north of the desert, including the port city of Leuchtem. When he crosses the veil to the realm of the gods, he leaves his priesthood in power.
* 50 AV - 00 AV: Over the course of a generation since the death of Valor, his priesthood loses its hold on the continent, until a strong mage in their ranks re-creates the spell to create *shahem*. The priesthood embarks on a holy mission of creating angels to help Valor fight his wars beyond the veil, turning mages into *shahem*. To broaden their influence, they begin gifting *shahem* to the failing maritime aristocrats in exchange for the right to "train" the mages in their territories.
* The mender Lyida founds the Qadisi Order, an organization devoted to the advancement of mages as powers in their own right, in reaction to the "adoptions." It is mostly a social network involving her own family, but as her *signum* (and mender gift) allows her to live indefinitely, she manages to amass a great deal of knowledge. The Qadisi mission gains traction as the influence of the Priests of Valor spreads across the sea and mages begin disappearing.
* The golden mage later known as Masi is taken from his manor by the Priests of Valor to be made into one of the *shahem*. His wife, a mesmer, tracks his kidnappers to Leuchtem, where she is taken and impressed into the secret assassin corps known as the Lions of Valor in order to wipe her memories. Masi's *signum* allows him to free himself from captivity temporarily, and he manages to bind himself to Carmine, setting in motion the events leading to [[Carmine Mage]] and the fall of the priesthood of valor.



