> How are your societies divided? Are these navigable roles or are you stuck with whatever you’re born into? What is considered masculine or feminine, both, and/or neither? What are considered to be jobs of the lower classes? Higher classes? How is this enforced? What’s the best possible combination of these things? The worst?

 it changes a lot over time in Verraine (which I have stories ranging from sort of bronze age "in the beginning when nobody knew how magic worked" to straight up portal fantasy to a sort of post-modern level of comprehension of how to use magic to do genetic engineering and computations) but for the purposes of simplicity, at the time period of CIVIL MAGE, specifically in Nahrian society which most of the story focuses on (there are other cultures but I don't want to go too deep down the rabbit hole for this question), society is very class-based in terms of job specialization, but there is a Temple devoted to identifying a child's "best place" based on aptitudes + the equivalent of job openings. You're not "forced" to go where you're placed, it's more of a recruitment service than a static "sorting" like in some books, but they're usually pretty accurate and it does allow for some upward mobility, although of course the nature of early childhood education definitely leads to a high instance of "you'll be great at what your dad does" and those cases of "my son is going to be a blacksmith and take over the family temple" don't usually wind up involving the Temple. 

Women and men are both able to be traders / political leaders / etc, although that sort of thing is generally handed by the FAMILY (aka husband + wife, mother + child, etc, than an individual). The main place where gender divisions happens is the military — the military per se is mostly comprised of young men, women who want to be fighters typically join the biladiyn which is a religious order of bodyguards for mages that contains members of both sexes. Since the biladiyn have more prestige than the city guard / raiding bands / levied armies, it mostly works out.

They would be thrilled if they could convince all of the soldiers to stop fighting, ultimately that's the goal :p convincing all of the young man who wants to fight instead of work that they should join the military and work on big infrastructure problems is the trickier of it.

"the military" is a bit of a misnomer in some ways... it's not like our military, it's more like "defenders against raids" and just because it's possible to wind up in a high status position because you have the aptitude for it definitely does not mean that everybody has the aptitude for it.