---
story: "Civil Mage"
chapter: "00"
section: "04"
summary: "synopsis and related materials"
status: "usable"
---

# [[Civil Mage]] Synopsis

## Edit Letters

- [ ] [[2020-12-29 - SYN Civil Mage]]

## Synopsis 

[[Irella|IRELLA]], one of the few Nahrian priestesses able to work [[thaumaturge|miracles]] by building constructs out of raw divine aether, spent the last five years helping the ruler of [[Marna]], ERAMEPI, bring peace to the raid and conflict-ridden region of Eastern [[Nahria]]. With the [[Unification War]] freshly behind them, Eramepi asks her to renovate the city of [[Oruku]] to fit its new role as capitol of the League of Lysarian Cities while he patrols the Lysar River as a training exercise for the newly integrated army. 

Certain that the the Senior High Priest of Temple of the Architect would never approve so fraught an undertaking, and dreading Eramepi's disappointment if she fails, [[Irella]] begins rerouting the sewers beneath the public markets under cover of night. Before she is able to finish, a drunken priest from the traditionalist Temple faction stumbles onto her worksite. Already primed to hatred by her role in the war and her barbarian birth, the priest vows to see her exiled when she refuses to abandon her work to facilitate the illicit liaison he had planned. 

Before Eramepi can intercede, word comes that he has been stricken dead by fever. The political situation devolves further into factionalism. Eramepi's sister, [[Valentia]]—known more for her diplomatic skills than her abilities as a war leader—is left scrambling to keep the Lysarian League together, and is unwilling to spend political capitol protecting Irella's position. After desperately trying to convince those in power that failing to upgrade the new capitol's underlying infrastructure will lead to disaster as the population continues to grow, Irella finds herself shuffled off to the hinterlands. 

The noble traders of [[Marna]], longtime allies of Eramepi and his family, beg Irella to disobey Valentia's orders and return north to Marna, where she was raised after Eramepi rescued her from the raiders who killed her parents. Irella is appalled to find that even men she took to be loyalists are contributing to the splintering of the League. As devoted as ever to Eramepi's vision of peace and law over incessant wars and roads riddled with violent thieves, Irella refuses to exacerbate the risk of dissolution by disobeying orders. 

Instead, she heads north to help General LUPICIN prepare for an upcoming [[Uskune trade fair|trade fair]] in the mining town of [[Uskune]]. The highland nomads, known as the [[Monche Nomads|Monche]], occupy the central plain between the V-shaped river valley that comprises Nahria. They have promised to bring valuable silks and furs to exchange for metalwork and grain, and even the mountain-dwelling Voldshee northerners plan to attend despite their [[Voldshee#Culture|superstitious]] prohibitions against mining. If the fair goes well for Lysaria, it will help shore up Valentia's power base, as she is the one who organized the event. Matters are precarious though, as bands of [[Monche Nomads|Monche]] have been raiding outlying Lysarian towns ever since Eramepi's death, and the locals are furious that the League has taken tithes but is not protecting them. 

When Irella arrives in Uskune, she discovers she has even less support than she anticipated. Lupicin has taken no steps to defend the outlying farms that supply Uskune, instead focusing on amassing metal wealth and training the army.  The senior priestess in Uskune is MAKARA, a xenophobic bully who was banished from the Temple in [[Marna]] after a childish prank that nearly left Irella dead. Further, the fairgrounds [[Lupicin]] orders Irella to build are better suited for a military trap than the strong trade relationship Valentia is trying to build. 

Having just fought off a Monche raid, with nowhere to turn within Temple leadership, Irella agrees to build the stadium as ordered. But the Monche tribe who comes to trade appear eager to forge an alliance. They honor Irella with one of their sacred dogs, which infuriates [[Makara]], who has always been jealous of Irella's status as a [[thaumaturge]]. Makara orders Irella to use her power to trap the Monche as retribution for a recent attack on a local homestead by a Monche raiding party of unknown lineage. Irella, though, is appalled at the idea of murdering innocents because of their ethnicity. Afraid of sending word back to the capitol for fear of being cast out for insubordination, she goes to Lupicin for support. He countermands Makara's order. 

Irella thinks that's the end of it until an army from Western Nahria crosses the plains for the first time in recorded history; Nahria is a river valley civilization, and its people typically wage war with neighboring city-states. The Haqaran city-states allied in the wake of the Lysarian [[Unification War]], and, fearing Lysarian conquest, have been driving the smaller tribes of Monche eastward ever since Eramepi died. The quick-march is a bid to conquer central [[Maehlorn]] while the Lysarian government is in disarray and the larger Monche tribes are overextended by the attempt to take part in the trade fair. At Lupicin's request, Irella fortifies Uskune, despite an attack by Haqaran assassins that leaves one of her guards crippled. 

The next morning, Irella is appalled to find that Lupicin plans to hunker down behind the new walls and leave the Monche to face the Haqarans alone. She tries to contact Valentia, but the Haqaran thaumaturges have managed to block intercity communications; the conquest has been planned for months, and Irella begins to suspect that Eramepi's death was not an accident after all. Determined keep the Haqarans from gaining strategic superiority by adding the [[Monche Prairie]] to the lands under their control, Irella demands that the Lysarians sortee to aid the Monche. 

During the battle, one of Irella's own bodyguards, though a member of a famously apolitical Holy Order, tries to kill her.  As she lays bleeding out, she learns that Lupicin and Makara are in league with the Haqarans and intend to unify the entire Isle of Maehlorn, subjugating the Monche before expanding into the [[Voldshee]] mountains and [[Arais Delta]]. The Haqarans use their incredible control of divine aether to crush her fortifications and throw the entire eastern river valley into disarray, destroying food stores and projecting despair onto the populace. 

Irella is rescued by the sacred dog she was gifted by the Monche, who summons help. The shattered remains of the tribe flee deeper into the foothills of the Voldshee mountains. Irella tries to convince the Monche that they were betrayed not by Lysaria or Valentia, but by a rogue element. Irella, though, is forced to confront the fact that she has no ability to promise anything from Lysaria. Her new friends among the Monche ask her to take them to her family among the Voldshee for succor, but Irella knows nothing of her heritage. With the League shattered and under attack by superior forces, Irella realizes she has nowhere to turn — unless, perhaps, the nobles of Marna had not sought to betray Valentia but rather to prepare to defend her from the coming rebellion. 

Irella convinces the Monche to join her in Marna, where they find the Governor eager to have additional forces. The city is a virtually impregnable fortress thanks to Irella's efforts during the first Unification War, and Irella spearheads the effort to blend Monche cavalry tactics with the highly disciplined soldiers trained by Eramepi. She and the blended army race toward Oruku, desperate to beat Lupicin to the capitol and warn Valentia.

Valentia, though, has already learned of the betrayal; the Temple traditionalists who pushed for Irella's ouster have deliberaetly poisoned the populace as part of the plot to conquer Maehlorn for the Nahrian gods. When Irella arrives in Oruku she finds the city illness-ridden and embroiled in civil war. She sneaks the army inside via the unfinished sewage system. Valentia, alerted to the plan thanks to a message conveyed by the Monche sacred hawks, is waiting with her loyalists; forces prepared by the prescient Marna nobles. Together, they take back control of the city walls and bring in fresh water just in time to protect Oruku from Lupicin and his Haqaran allies. 

Oruku is ill-prepared to withstand a siege, however, and Valentia must win a decisive victory if she is to have any hope of keeping the League united. Irella,  the Monche shamans she has befriended, and a handful of thaumaturges from Oruku combine their knowledge in an attempt to overcome the Haqaran priests' psychic attack. The efforts of the Monche cavalry, coupled with the might of the Lysarian army led by the loyal Governor of Marna, are able to crush the invaders against Irella's fortifications. Lupicin is killed in the battle, along with most of the Haqaran officers. Makara and her allies in the priesthood are exiled. Though the political purge of the Temples evokes anxiety throughout the League, Irella and the other thaumaturges serve as living proof that the gods are on their side. 

A grateful Valentia offers to support Irella if she wants to take the mantle of High Priestess of the Architect, but Irella demurs, instead choosing to found the Institute of Peace, an agnostic Order of allied thaumaturges that seeks to understand all the miracles the Isle of Maehlorn is blessed with, and bring about the peaceful, respectful alliance of all Maehlorn's peoples. Her first act is to build a permanent encampment for the Monche in the central plain, to facilitate trade. 
