---
tag: fic/editPending
---

John's family owns a shipping business. And part of what they do is smuggle the spheres of preserved food from North Korea, out to other parts of the world. The food lasts forever. It's a whole food preservation opportunity, but the framing story in general is smuggling. Hopefully, this will be a little bit unusual for 1000 a month shelf stories, because it's focused on food distribution and not eating food per se and also the smuggling will, hopefully, you know be relatively unique for the anthology, be a different take. So, this is a good opportunity to focus on the Delta people, and John can be John can be the, let's say, middle son of the smuggler, selling the family business, or shows smuggling, something that he's doing. Maybe the family doesn't actually want to squabble maybe they think piracy is bad there's an opportunity for a tiny bit of soapboxing here about piracy and I was already going to do some research about piracy for the newsletter so that's a good pointer there. Alright so piracy what I want to point to be to be about the unintentional effects of piracy, I like that I like, maybe, pirates aren't great people. But that sort of discounts the drama and the democracy of it all. We could have it be a snark against democracy, a little bit. I don't know if they would actually say that though, politics, but maybe something about democracy being naive, like, oh it's cute that you could have, you know you want everybody to be on the same page and everybody had people say shares, but oh here's the, here's the solid politics thing, here's an opportunity to say, Okay, you gave all of your people total control over their everything, and then they gambled it away and now they don't have any of the resources they need to take care of themselves. Question mark. I don't know how I feel about that. It's like a direction you can go on. Alright so piracy and smuggling of food. This is a good way to bring in the importance of prestige foods. Here's a good opportunity to riff off of the Columbian Exchange. The people could be fighting against the priests they're stealing from. And then, I don't want to have it be the tax officers of the place they're selling to, we could do something with religious prescriptions. I know that you know the Israelites had written, religious prescriptions against foreigner food, so we could riff off of that Egyptian like thing with pigs. Oh, let's see, so obstacle can be all that stuff from obstacles for seafaring, but let's see if we can't get some kind of unique speculative take on those obstacles. Oh, here's a good way to bring in the people from the island. This could be after the Rome Walker has decimated them and it's just a bunch of teenagers who are stealing stuff from people, because the Rome Walker recently we've done a bunch of them, this could be like immediately post with the Rome walkers coming and going. So that could the Raiders fighting pirates like trying to steal from the pirates. There could be like a whole lie or anything. Pirates fighting off Raiders. So that's one obstacle. I don't love seasick. I think it's a little bit overdone. But what if we had land sickness and what if it was just permanently. The guy has a permanent case of lead sickness he does not feel comfortable leaving the ship at all. That would be. I mean, it's cool. As a side note about character what kind of character, it was this could have been an out. He learns about responsibility, maybe it's probably not going to stop piracy. Maybe soon it's just so fraught piracy is fraught because there's the whole like he could go legit, stop engaging in piracy thing. But it's like, It's too moralistic to do it that way. Piracy is complicated, it's hard to have complicated nuance and a 3000 word short story, or 5000 or however long it will be the need to double check that space to have less of this healer. Kinda like it being about taxes. There's just something fun about them learning to be asked to care of his people. But I don't know if there's room for that and distorted the short, like, Okay, so one of his people gets shot or stabbed or hurt by one of the Raiders. The Winged Raiders, and they like expect him to take care of himself. Ironically, through the UI. So okay, so the. There aren't any med mages, medical banjos doctors aren't in doctors, because the doctor goddess got wiped out, but there are, there definitely gonna be healers, so somebody from the Delta. Let's just have a bit herbal medicine because nobody at this particular point of time has figured out magic healing because looks so herbal medicine. And this is a good opportunity to bring in the stuff about Mesopotamia exorcisms and stuff, herbal medicine. And I have to pay for it, but he can't afford it so they turned to the Capitol's the guy who's in charge and he was like what you mean. I pay you money. Yeah. So eventually, he's like, alright so they sat back out. And they managed to make the delivery that time. We must they must get like driven to some port or something like some tiny little town where they have to pay the ruinous rates for the medicine, and then they stepped back out to complete the delivery, but upon delivery, he, like holds back a bunch of money, maybe I just realized it's too on the nose. But really it's a food anthology so there's a lot of opportunity here, because I can like herbal medicine can be food right like it can be thought as healing I like that that's a nice theme food healing, food is good. Eating healthy is how we stay healthy. You are what you eat kind of thing. Alright so, see one, they're trying to make the delivery seem to. There's an attack, scene three, the report. Seen for that makes the delivery. Same one's gonna have to be had taking the delivery from his from his like family member or something, and being lectured about how what he's doing is wrong and not keeping with family and blah blah blah blah. And the younger son is like I want freedom i want this, I want that but that is like fine, you're on your own. Like I can't help you. The openers department stuck on. Catch asleep with a conversation with your father that is a quarter mile keep left to continue on i 795 South follow signs for Owings Mills Baltimore, blah blah blah. I do not want to start with I have a job for you. I want to start a race, but I guess we could do it as a flashback thing with the dad keep left to continue on i 795 south. Continue on i 795 south for nine miles. Is there some way that we can have a wink people have some, oh yeah, no, that's all communal though I don't let's like socialist. Oh, we could talk about their total obedience to the clan leaders here and like really, really hate on that and like the priesthood is the remnants of the priesthood that's left maybe because it's all the boys that are just rampaging so yeah so they can riff off of how, you know, he hates the socialist, the authoritarian Socialist Dictatorship thing going on there with the wind table, and then find out the consequences of his own method. I like that. It has a nice symmetry. And then the way people are probably starving and that's why they're trying to steal the food. The pirates are trying to sell it to the people. Carthage poo I wonder if I can get the cult of that oh yeah, this should come right after the salted wars all the land is salted down and the call to valor wiped everybody out so like there's these, there's two competing people who need food, And they're trying to sell those who can pay, but like not fight so yeah. All right cool this is coming together this is coming together.

Aliens attacked with the dawn. Their wings like blah blah blah in the morning sky blah blah blah. This world's equivalent of commie bastards, no respect for other people's ownership of things. Sure he paid for the magic spheres. Ether spheres with counterfeit coins. I'm sure they'd been stolen, but he hasn't robbed anyone. Not like with weapons. Absolutely barbaric, to be attacked on his own ship by people who didn't even have the good grace, some bleed red. Two arms who shouted, drawing. When thinking blow the blow dart from. I don't know central cabin house of his. It should basically be a pontoon boat sailboat whatever loaded with poison darts, of course, no frogs harmed in the making of it. Last one was a paralytic, it struck one of the wing bastards who wouldn't kill him, he'd fall to the ground and fall into the ocean and probably drown, but it wouldn't be his fault that the guy died. Any one of his companions could have flown down and say if we want hypocrisy to who's from this guy. Why won't the bastards leave us alone, so and so sad when the battle was over. I heard they're starving. So the cabin, and half a mile keep left to continue on Maryland 100 East follow signs for Gibson Island. Declan can give a rat's ass, they were starving. Lots of people are starving, he said, keep left to continue on Maryland 100 East. The park Carthage Delta people are starving to continue on Maryland 100 East for three miles. They'll starve if we don't get this food to them. and they pay, cold, hard cash.

