---
story: "Temple Mage"
chapter: "00"
section: "04"
summary: "synopsis and related materials"
status: "usable"
---

## [[Temple Mage|Temple Mage]] Synopsis 

Ever since Kia started accompanying her father [[Khent]] on his fishing trips, his assurances that "everything is going to be fine" have fallen flat. The [[Aakari River]] should have flooded by now, bringing with it fish from the highlands and desperately needed water to feed the crops of local farmers. Their stores of salted fish and bartered grain are running short; if they don’t bring home more food than the anemic river can provide, they will starve—along with her disabled mother.

Kia’s mother [[Zahle]] is a skilled basket weaver, but before she lost her legs in a [[wyvern]] attack, she was one of the desert nomads known as the [[Imazi]]. The encroaching sands are as much Kia’s heritage as the waters, and she is convinced that heritage holds the key to feeding her family. When another day’s traps turn up empty, Kia convinces her father to accompany her into the [[Midire Desert]] to hunt the moles that live there. 

They are not the only hunters. Their digging disturbs a great wyvern, but together, Kia and her father are able to use their fishing tools to kill it, but when she returns home triumphant with mole-meat while her father finishes processing the carcass on the outskirts of their village, she is beset by a gang of local warriors. The "guards" are mostly landless sons of struggling farmers tolerated for protecting the villagers from outside raiders, and they have never approved of the half-breed Kia—or her Imazi mother. When they demand half the meat as a “desert tithe,” Kia refuses. Before her paternal cousins left for [[Oena]], the delta homeland of their mother’s trading family, the guards would never have dared harm her. Without their protection, Kia learns that bravery has a price as she is beaten and robbed. 

Embracing her fury to mask her distress—she knows she should have just given them the half they first wanted—Kia arrives home to find that her mother collapsed from hunger during the day.  While the women tend to each other’s hurts, Kia realizes that she knows what her mother is thinking when they touch. For though Zahle insists that she is fine, and appears much more concerned about Kia’s hurts, her mental dialog reveals the truth: she is badly worried about the upcoming travel she faces. Armed with her mother’s secret fears, Kia pressures her parents to let her be the one who joins monthly fishwife caravan to the nearby trading town to sell her mother’s baskets. When her father returns, he agrees; better to have Kia out of town than be forced to confront the guards who harmed her. He is sure the wyvern meat will be enough for now, and fears the swelling number of dissolute youth in town. Many farmers are struggling this year. 

At the market, Kia is frustrated by her limited opportunities to test her newly discovered telepathy; theirs is not a physically demonstrative culture and opportunities for physical contact are rare. Near the end of the market time, a traveling mage-priest named [[Pahar]] approaches. He tells her how he detected her latent magic while on a mission to investigate the historic edges of his temple’s influence, for the Temple is growing stronger after the ravages of a distant civil war. Though [[Pahar]] wants her to go with him to the [[Temple of Tef]], she is not interested in leaving her family to serve a goddess she feels abandoned her people decades ago. He purchases the last of the baskets she has for sale and accompanies her as she tries to secure food for her family for the upcoming dry season. 

He offers to travel with her a ways and teach her a little of her magic. Kia puts aside her fears of traveling with a stranger and agrees. She learns that magic cannot create food where none exists, or bring back her mother’s legs. It is, however, a useful way for a young woman to balance the scales against physically stronger men, and when she arrives home she sneaks away from the priest’s discussions with her father to confront the thieving guards. She exhausts her magic to discover that the mole-meat is already gone, and when the guards realize her magic is depleted, she flees in the face retribution. Pahar senses her magic use and rescues her from the angry guards. When she returns home, Khent tells her that once an opportunity is missed, you cannot go back and fix it. 

Kia understands that her father thinks she should go with Pahar to the temple to learn more about her magic. Khent remembers better times, when their people tithed baskets of fish and grain to the agricultural goddess. Kia, though, cannot stand the thought of abandoning her parents without enough food to last through the dry season. Khent proposes selling the family’s boat at the next market day, but with the waters so low, what little food was being sold is priced dearly… and there is no one willing to buy the boat. 

When Zahle sends Kia to the river to get water for the evening’s cookpot, she is certain it is so they can discuss how best to send her away "for her own good." Running out of time to help her parents, faced with river water too shallow and muddy to cook with, Kia uses her magic to dig a channel in the river, deepening it enough to use and perhaps even provide a haven for some of the bigger fish. When she returns home, she is excited to share her success, but her father wearily points out that no amount of moving mud around will make more water, and that with the "guards" so enraged, the village is not safe for her. 

As she watches her mother struggle to feed four people with the meager provisions she has, Kia offers Pahar a deal: if he will go into the desert with her to hunt enough meat to tide her parents over until the rains return the Aakari  river to its former glory, she will focus on mastering her magic. Pahar agrees, though a very worried Zahle tries to frighten him with tales from her childhood in the desert.

While they are hunting, Pahar senses a mage-duel between Imazi mages. Kia insists on going to meet the mages, suspecting they must be Imazi tribal leaders, but discovers that it is instead a fight to the death between an Imazi tribal leader and a foreign scout from [[Alliju]], fighting not according to the rituals of leadership she has heard about from her mother, but in earnest. Fumbling her magic, she tries to help, and after the battle is over, she must cope with having caused a human death. Kindly, the Imazi leader indicates that remembers Zahle of the Imazi. He promises to bring her parents one of the tribe’s sheep in thanks for her aid in saving his life, and protecting his territory in the desert from incursion -- though after her indenture the tribe's obligations to Zahle ended. The Imazi mage also offers Pahar a warning about the expansionist Cult of Valor; it seems the Cult is interested in controlling more than just the city of Alliju. The "Triangle" of resource-rich [[Lake Tsiya]] and the fertile northern Delta region could anchor an empire. Though Kia impetuously asks to join the tribe of her mother and learn magic from her mother’s kin, and to help, the desert mage gently tells her that though she is welcome among the sands, she is not truly of them. Though she returns home disappointed, her father hopes that she is able to earn them further aid by mastering her magic in the service of [[Tef]]. 

Pahar takes Kia upriver to the great cliffs known as the Gates of Tef, where Kia is exposed to her first taste of city life. She struggles to wait patiently in crowded lines for passage to the top of the cliffs, a struggle compounded by the chaos of pickpockets and buskers hawking street food. It is impossible to avoid touching strangers, and Kia is forced to reveal her telepathy to Pahar. He purchases restrictive clothing that provides some relief, but Kia begins to feel alien, faced with differing customs and it is not only her telepathy that brings her confusion. Kia barely makes it up the cliffs without breaking down and fleeing for home, but perseveres until she and Pahar reach the temple. 

The temple bureaucracy is even worse than the lines at the Gates. Though she has Pahar’s support, he is not as high-ranking as she had assumed and only High Priest [[Tenry]] is able to authorize shipments of grain to needy villages. He is, unfortunately, not available, as he has gone to a nearby village to purchase upgrades to the temple's furnishings. Exhausted and overwhelmed, Kia allows herself to be swept up in the whirlwind of rituals that accompany being a new-found mage instead of investigating the problem of the waning river. 

Kia struggles with her priestly training and is upset to realize that her deep red magic is in fact the weakest possible. Though mages are rare enough that her powers are still valuable, her ego is hurt. Kia's feelings of inadequacy are compounded by the non-magical requirements of priestly life in the Temple of Tef: the task of becoming literate feels insurmountable. The worst part is that the junior priest assigned to teach her remedial skills is only a year or two older and extremely attractive. [[Masi]], orphaned son of the late high priestess [[Shiama]], notices her distress and takes her out to learn “on the job” practical magic, teaching her the proper way to magically till harvested land on farms under the aegis of the Temple. By focusing on small, useful things instead of fretting over her place in the temple’s hierarchy, she is able to center herself and find happiness.

A few days later, Kia attends a planting festival made possible because of the temple’s magic. But while other priests celebrate their prowess, Kia cannot help but notice that some locals still appear impoverished, even in the shadow of the temple. Unable to reconcile the speeches she hears with the difficulties she sees, she demands an explanation from Pahar and Masi, but is deeply unsatisfied by their answers. She confronts the highest-ranking priest available, a woman named [[Alara]]. Alara leads the faction of priests who were loyal to Masi’s mother, which has fallen from favor with the ascension of the more materialistic Tenry. Alara explains that while once it might have been possible to send famine relief to the distant villages like Kia’s home, the grain stores are not what they were under previous leadership. High Priests are elected, and there are many who would rather enjoy their current prosperity than work to expand the influence of the Temple and help more people. Masi and Pahar are horrified, but Kia realizes that while the temple’s role is to help people in general, it does poorly at solving specific problems for specific individuals. The temple is a bureaucracy, not a charity, and not all priests are altruists. 

Uncertain whether this is a cause she wants to commit to, though she understands its benefits, Kia avoids returning to the temple and instead explores the surrounding community on her own. While there is much good to be seen, she also comes across an ethnic Imazi named [[Cyprian]] begging for scraps in the streets. This is shocking to her, as the desert nomads have a reputation not only as fierce warriors, but also for their pride. Kia leaps to help him, and learns that the [[Imazi]] troubles with the Cult of Valor are not confined to desert skirmishes; the anemic river has weakened the northern villages, and the Cult of Valor has sent an army toward [[Jisge]] to create a secondary stronghold. [[Cyprian]] has come to the Temple of Tef to warn the priests about Valor’s conquests, but fears the Temple has already been subverted. He has taken to begging as a way to gain information; he is, she realizes, an Imazi spy… and he convinces her to help him find out more in exchange for sending word home to her parents[^SYN2145]. Kia is somewhat frightened to realize that leaving is no longer an option: she fears the Cult of Valor will spread its conquests from Jisge to her parents’ village. Only if the Temple of Tef extends its influence once again northward will her family be spared from the Cult of Valor, which is known for creating conscripted armies and glorifying the horrors of war. <sup>([[2019-02-18 - SYN Temple Mage|Note]])</sup>

Only priests can access the Temple records, and without that status, she will never convince the senior priests to aid her. Hoping to uncover proof that Tenry has been corrupted by the Cult of Valor, Kia learns the skills necessary for induction into the priestly ranks. She masters the five forms of magic the Temple teaches and memorizes the sacred texts, but her confidence is shaken by the newly-returned Tenry, who has made it clear she has no place in the Temple. She is not from the Temple's lands, and the status-conscious High Priest disapproves of her rural upbringing. Only with Alara's subtle help—and Paher's documented proof that she originates from a village that once worshiped Tef—is she able to withstand his questioning. 

She passes the first trial and must face the crucible, a test of Self created by the goddess herself; she is told only that it will leave her forever changed. Kia enters the temple sanctum and is subjected to violent assaults on her mind and spirit, but is unexpectedly able to withstand the worst of the crucible’s manipulations by applying lessons learned from the mage-duel in the desert. During debriefing, she learns that Tef was also mesmer, able to read minds and manipulate them. As a merely carmine mage Kia should not have been able to resist; mental defenses are her signum, the signature magic she is able to perform with exponential efficiency. The revelation of her mesmer gifts shake the foundations of the relationships she has formed, and High Priest Tenry declares that as a mesmer, she was ineligible for the test of Self and her results are invalidated.  

Masi overcomes his discomfort with Kia’s secret gifts and speaks out against Tenry’s decision, declaring that to deny Kia a place for sharing the same gifts as Tef once held would be madness. Though the High Priest tries to overrule him as blinded by youth and attraction to the exotic, denigrating Kia as too weak to bear Tef’s mantle. Alara steps in and . In an uncommonly close vote, Kia is confirmed as a priest of Tef — but her gifts are revealed, and any hope she might have had of using her telepathic gifts to uncover corruption in the temple are dashed. No one will let her touch them now; she is pariah. 

Resolving to use more mundane means to get to the bottom of the Temple’s corruption, Kia attempts to use her hardwon literacy to uncover clues in the temple’s archives. Unsurprisingly, the archivist, [[Hika]], is standoffish and uncooperative — and bitterly angry to have found Masi in Kia’s orbit. As the son of the last High Priestess, Masi is one of the Temple’s most eligible bachelors. Though the archivist is not a mage, she is only a few years Masi’s senior and has long viewed a match with him to be her due. While Masi distracts the archivist, Kia discovers that a dam was recently built upriver to stop the lake from drying up. Horrified, she confronts Alara and Paher, who claim ignorance but must admit they are not surprised; the lake region is an important source of supplies for the temple.

Kia is furious at the blatant unfairness and clear signal that the Temple does not care about ''her'' people. Without asking permission or checking in with the temple hierarchy, she decides to leave the temple and investigate the. Masi discovers her absence and follows her, catching up when she is '''dealing with obstacle on the way to the dam.''' She tells him that she is going to [[Lake Tsiya]] to unblock the river, and Masi is so happy that she is acting as a priest that she does not mention she is doing so on her own authority. 

When they arrive in Lake Tsiya, Kia and Masi see happy children and productively working adults. Kia is forced to confront the reality that the people of Lake Tsiya are not evil, and ''do'' depend on the lake for ''their'' livelihoods. She decides to investigate why the dam was built, in hopes of discovering a justification for destroying it. In the end, she finds no convenient evidence, nothing from the local people to hint at corruption -- and decides to destroy the dam anyway[^SYN2206]. If other priests are allowed to privilege the people of the lake, after all, she should be allowed to privilege the people downstream -- people who also need that water, and who before the dam would have had it. 

The waters begin to flow again, but before Kia and Masi can leave, the inhabitants of Lake Tsiya identify Masi and Kia as priests and ask them to repair the dam. Kia has a choice between lying and claiming that she just doesn't have the power to repair it, but will report to the temple ... or admitting that it was purposeful and lying and claiming her activities were sanctioned. Or, the third option: honesty, which Kia ultimately chooses. Masi didn't know her actions were unsanctioned, and is angry with her. He promises the people that he will report the fallen dam to the temple.

Masi and Kia ride the river back to the temple. There is some devastation along the flooded riverbanks, but Kia defensively points out that it's mostly to new construction. She shows Masi how to catch fish, partly to show him the way of life that was at stake and to remember her father while she's fearing for him. They discuss doing what you can even if it's not your own people VS. saving your resources and energy so you don't run out. As they approach the South bridge at the edge of town, Masi and Kia find Cyprian waiting for them. He has seen the rise in the river levels and realized that Kia must have been responsible; he has been waiting for her to return. He reveals to Kia that the Imazi and the Valorian cultists are massing their armies in the north; the Valorians intend to invade, and the Imazi cannot afford to allow the expansionist cult to control such a critically important location as Lake Tsiya. Though Kia is once again resentful that her home will suffer because of the needs and importance of Lake Tsiya, Masi is focused  on the fact that Kia ''knew'' the Imazi was spying on the Temple and kept that to herself; he understands that she has a different political agenda than the High Priest, but he expected her to have genuinely internalized the ideals of Tef and to truly be working for the good of the Temple. They argue bitterly, Kia pointing out that the Temple of Tef is his home; he has no idea what it feels like to have divided loyalties, and while she agrees with and supports the goals of the Temple of Tef, her primary obligation is to her family. 

Masi points out that she will almost certainly be punished for what she has done, and if she wants to join the Imazi for "their war," she should leave now. As Kia hesitates, Temple authorities come to take them ''both'' into custody for acting without sanction... and for the first time, Kia feels shame for her impetuous action at the dam. Not only is Masi suffering because of her, but now she cannot help her family. Besides, as Cyprian pointed out, she '''alone''' cannot turn the tide of war -- although he reveals that she will be key in defeating the Cult of Valor; the leader of his tribe is a prophet and saw someone who looks like Kia in a vision, attacking an enemy camp with Cyprian. But no attack will be possible without aid from from the mages at the Temple of Tef; the normally-nomadic Imazi cannot defend the river cities without food to support them. The river running higher is a solution to a long-term problem; an army on the march is the immediate problem. 

Kia and Masi are placed in a holding cell pending their trial, and find that Pahar had already been taken into custody. Her mentor is weary and she is overcome with guilt and regret, but Pahar is kind to her. He tries to reassure her, but has little luck, especially when Alara interrupts to confer about the upcoming trial; she does not have a lot of hope that she will be able to prevent the council from banishing the three of them from the Temple. Kia interrupts with a stubborn non-apology, angrily explaining that the Temple is corrupt but Alara dismisses her; her only hope, at this point, is to preserve Masi, as he is the key to her hopes for the future of the Temple. Masi, though, surprises them all by stating that the Temple isn't worth preserving if it doesn't fulfill Tef's principals, and that Kia is right. Alara asks Pahar whether he is certain he wants to continue standing by Kia, and he confirms that he does, even knowing the consequences. His statement "Her methods were wrong; her actions were not." only makes Kia feel more shame; she had not expected others in the Temple to agree with her, or to lose anything because of her actions. Alara, though, takes their suspicions about Tenry's corruption and promises to do what she can. [^NOTE TM SYN 2019-0218-2158]

The temple trial turns into a full-on factional fight between Alara's traditionalists and Tenry's followers, Alara having uncovered proof that Tenry has sent grain to the Cult of Valor's soldiers. Alara claims that she ordered Kia and Masi to bring down the dam, and formally accuses Tenry of an illicit alliance with the Cult of Valor. Rather than hide it, Tenry claims that it is his prerogative as High Priest to liaise with other temples; most do not gainsay him, and the schism is clear. Kia remarks that she doubts Tenry as he is now could pass Tef's Test of Self, which enrages Tenry; he banishes her, but the traditionalists -- at Masi's impassioned urging -- leave as well, splitting the Temple. As they are escorted from the temple, [[Hika]] bitterly remarks that Kia has won, she got what she came for and destroyed everything that Hika cares about. Kia laughs with equal bitterness, accusing Hika of the same self-centeredness she detests in Tenry; if that is what her view of what the Temple should be is, it's no wonder Masi never gave her the time of day. Yet the verbal victory rings hollow for her; her home is about to be destroyed by the Cult of Valor, and even with the support of the traditionalists, it will be a struggle to stand against them, for she has learned that the Test of Self excised their ability to use combat magics.  

With so many people devastated by her actions, and counting on her for inspiration and a cause, Kia knows she cannot just rush headlong into war with the Cult of Valor. Unlike so many times in her life, she must have a plan. She considers how her father would want her to handle this situation; how Tef would have. After discussion with Alara and the others (Pahar, Masi, and four other former priests), they meet with Cyprian and begin traveling south. 

Cyprian and Pahar lead the traditionalists down the highland road toward Senna's Ford, bypassing Lake Tsiya in favor of traveling by way of the capital, which has had a tense relationship with the Temple of Tef since the recent civil war. While [[Alara]] meets with [[Jalqadi]], the leader of the mountain people, Kia and Masi speak in the town square about Tenry's betrayal and the coming war. Most people they speak to do not view a war in Senna's Ford or conflicts over Lake Tsiya as anything worth worrying over; the mountains will protect them, after all, and what could a foreign cult possibly want from their mountain town? Masi tries to explain , but Kia thinks about how she felt when Pahar came to her, and realizes that speeches about global impacts on trade and government will not have an impact. They return to the guest quarters feeling very disheartened. 

The traditionalists reach the lower falls and Pahar somewhat dryly suggests that rather than wait in line -- as he had done previously -- they use their magic to carve a wider pathway into the cliffside, so that the increased numbers of travelers are able to travel. Though Masi expresses concern about opening up a wider path for the Cult of Valor to bring an army into the mountains, Amara points out that the cult certainly has mages of their own, and that if they reach the lower falls, they and the Imazi will already have failed in their efforts to stop the Cult from establishing control over the river. 

The traditionalists build a new temple at the lower falls, as its location at the confluence of two rivers is favorable and the liminal point between the mountains and the plains has good symbolism, but Kia is frustrated; she wants to defend Senna's Ford. Amara points out that priests are not warriors, and the best help they can offer . Kia, though, is not so limited, and continues on toward Senna's Ford and the Imazi. She does not go empty-handed, though -- or alone. Cyprian and Masi help her transport the barrels of rations the other priests were able to secure. Though they cannot use their magic for combat, they can nonetheless aid the war effort in important ways. 

Kia arrives in Senna's Ford and the flood she loosed by breaking the dam has overcome the village's mud dikes. The people are already rebuilding, but she is wracked by guilt. She and Masi immediately jump in to help rebuild, and Kia finds herself working alongside the guards who she once fought. After finishing the levees -- much sooner than they could have without magic -- Kia asks the young men to  disperse the flood they brought to the townsfolk. She continues on to see her family and plans to introduce her mother to Cyprian; her father, though, is gravely ill; while out fishing, he was bitten by a venomous seasnake that traveled much farther upstream than it normally would have, due to the changing temperature and salinity of the river -- as well as the lack of food because the moonfish did not migrate without the seasonal flood. Masi is able to save [[Khent]], not with magic, but with knowledge; he has read about these creatures in the temple archives, but the cure requires a poultice of moonfish scales. As Zahle made a [decorative floral pin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tbqpDg06ubo) out of the scales of the moonfish Kia caught before she left for the Temple, Masi thinks he will be able to help Khent recuperate and help with the rebuilding efforts if he stays behind, as he's reluctant to reveal the pacifist vulnerability of the priests of Tef to the Cult of Valor. Though the Imazi will know because of Cyprian, he has promised only to tell the leader of his tribe. 

Kia leaves her family in Masi's care and goes with Cyprian to meet with the Imazi leaders. The tribes are gathered at [[Jisge]] to make their stand; scouts report that the Cult of Valor is bringing its army across the desert in an enormous sandship powered by magic instead of the wind, and the prophets have seen that Jisge is where they intend to begin their attack on Oena. Oena, unlike the seafaring people of [[Alliju]], the Cult of Valor's stronghold, draws much of its power and resources from the inland river valleys.

The cultists arrive in Jisge and are unprepared for the massed Imazi warriors; during negotiations, a representative of the cult of Valor tries to convince the desert tribes that the river people are none of their concern. He promises that their right of way across the bridge will be respected and points out that the cult's quarrel is not with the Imazi. The Imazi leaders stiffly declare that mage-duels for territory are traditionally held at dawn and the agent just laughs, saying this is not a negotiation, it is a . He claims that [[Fajar]] is the greatest mage to ever live, but he does not have time to defeat each Imazi mage one-by-one; there will be a battle, and they '''will''' take the town. Out of respect for the prowess of the Imazi, the cultists are offering the Imazi a chance to leave. 

The Imazi refuse, but are worried; the strongest of them can sense the High Priest of Valor is a very strong mage, stronger than even Masi; he resonates at green. But one of the old women -- the leader of Cyprian's tribe, revealed to be Kia's great-aunt -- points out that his strength makes him vulnerable; she has had a vision of Kia and she believes that her carmine power is too diffuse and weak for a green mage to sense. It wasn't until this day that she was able to interpret her vision, but this vision is why she ordered Cyprian to stay in the mountains once he found her. 

The armies meet in the desert. While the battle rages, Imazi mages shield their warriors against fire and kinetic attacks from the Cult of Valor, counterattacking with their own edged and earth-moving attacks. Kia and Cyprian tunnel under the battle to within range of the enemy High Priest, who is a strong enough mage to have stayed back out of range of much of the fighting while still using his magic. They avoid detection by the scouts and lesser Valorian mages by swinging around. Though Kia finds it emotionally difficult to "abandon" the Imazi and the people of Jisge instead of fighting, she stays strong and is able to make the more intelligent, delayed choice of going around and confronting the true "hidden" threat of Fajar. 

As she reaches the point where she will have to reveal herself to Fajar if she is to attack, Kia struggles with the choice to kill a man in cold blood. It is assassination, not a true fight... and she keenly remembers that the Imazi way between mages is to duel. She fears that neither the pacifist Temple of Tef nor the Imazi -- who have already rejected her once -- will accept her actions. She finds herself resenting the Imazi chivalric code, remembering the duel in the desert -- and wonders aloud if the better choice would not have been to kill the Valorian mage, rather than let him return to Alliju. Cyprian tells her that sometimes to stop great evil, you have to make hard, complicated choices -- and sacrifices, like he has done in leaving his people to act as a beggar for months in a foreign town. Kia rushes Fajar and magically executes him before he is able to react, hamstringing the attack on Jigse. 

Cyprian and Kia skirt the edges of the battle to rejoin the Imazi command group, which is trying to decide what to do with the defeated Valorian army. To make them cross the desert without their mages would be a death sentence, and the Cult of Valor itself is not defeated, only beaten -- they learn that High Priest Azer is still in Alliju and is a powerful mesmer. Kia suggests that any who wish to stay and live a peaceful life may agree to work at the lower falls helping the temple there and building the town into the city she suspects it could become. Using her mesmer gifts, Kia reads the soldiers' minds as she makes them vow to live in peace, and is able to reject several she discovers are lying. The Imazi take the rejected soldiers with them into the desert as laborers where they will not be a danger to anyone, dividing them up amongst the tribes. Kia leads the defeated soldiers to Senna's Ford, escorted by her mother's tribe. Kia is able to eat dinner with Masi and her family -- the entire family, including great aunt and cousins.

### Gestalt Concerns 

* Make sure Tenry's motivations are clear and believable. 
* Make sure to connect her thoughts "back home" frequently.

---

[^SYN2145]: She could send letters home, but literacy is quite rare in this society among the lower classes, and she is not from the kind of town with a lot of members of the upper class available to read a letter. I could probably integrate the Imazi a little better by having Cyprian relay a message to her mother, though.

[^SYN2206]: I should clarify that the dam is relatively new, and that the river's water levels do fluctuate seasonally, so while people noticed something is different it hadn't yet risen to the level of assuming a dam instead of a drought. I think there's room to integrate Tenry and the factionalization with Amara more firmly into the civil war drama that led to the shrinking of the Temple's influence in the first place; let me do some more ruminating on that and how I can clarify and deepen Tenry's motivations some more, and I'll get back to everyone; it was definitely a recurring theme and I think I have some ideas on how I can address it without adding too many random complications.

[^SYN2158]: Be sure to make special note of how few gifted people there are at the temple. Fewer than usual. No healer, that's why Amara's eye is still walleyed. But Kia knows about an Imazi healer... The one who saved her mother Zahle. Leverage that for the alliance in the jail scene.