
> A magistrate was someone elected to certain offices. Consuls, praetors, aediles, and quaestors were examples magistrates. These were political offices which had specific designated roles in governing or administering the Roman Republican state. Although religious rites and observances were very much part of every aspect of life during the Republic, there was nothing particularly religious about being a magistrate, per se. After a magistrate had completed his term of office, he thereafter remained a member of the Senate for life in most cases. There were other ways to get into the Senate, but being elected to a magistracy was the usual one in the late Republic.
> %% %%
> A magistrate could also be a priest, although certain priesthoods would have made it very difficult to have a political or military career worth talking about. The flamen dialis, a priest specially dedicated to Jupiter, could never leave Rome for more than one night and could never touch iron or ride a horse, and he could never attain the high office of consul. However, members of the college of pontifices who were not barred from doing so by a role like this one could and did have powerful political and Military careers. Julius Caesar, probably the most famous Roman ever, was also the pontifex Maximus or chief priest.
> %% %%
> A magistrate could instead be an augur, a different sort of religious functionary whose job was specifically the reading of Omens. In Roman society, practically every major public event was preceded by an augur doing some kind of thing to make sure the gods approved of whatever the event was. The two main ways of doing this were by examining the flight of birds and by slaughtering an animal or bird and examining its entrails. Doing this was important enough that we are aware of manuals and diagrams to show people how to do it correctly. As your quotation points out, an augur could put a hard stop on substantially anything the Roman State attempted to do simply by claiming that the Omens were bad. Caesar's co-consul Bibulus used this technique (as a magistrate, per your source) on several occasions to try to block Caesar's agenda, but was generally unsuccessful.
> %% %%
> In sum, a magistrate was an elected, civil office. The other two were ceremonial and religious, and with some exceptions were not elected, but appointed,usually by the existing members to fill a vacancy. However, they came with great prestige and could be a great help to someone trying to become a magistrate. However, while this could be helpful, it was in no way necessary, and it was perfectly possible to have an important political career without having any specific religious role.
> <cite>— u/Silas_Of_The_Lambs at [AskHistorians](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/qtbizf/what_were_the_distinctions_between_magistrates/hkiuci4/?context=3)</cite>