- [b]  [[rAskHistorians|r/AskHistorians]] [thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/knl41q/why_was_that_the_greeks_and_romans_of_antiquity/) about  paintings in [[classical antiquity]]
- [l] related:: [[2021.01.04 Wax]] 

There was a really great comment that outlined the major painting techniques throughout history, one of which involved wax, which would be perfect for using as a cultural element for the people of the [[Arais Delta]] and any culture that prizes [[nichtdonts]] herding. #fic/expandWorldbuilding 

> Encaustic is as long-lasting as tempera, doesn't stink and is good for both walls and boards and pretty much any solid surface, even on the outside (though that's still not ideal), but it's harder to use. The binder this time is wax. In order to use it, you need to heat wax (which can be dangerous if you don't know what you're doing, as it may pop up and burn you), mix the pigment and paint with either knives or brushes while it cools. Once cold, you can heat it again with a candle to improve details. And finally you would apply a thin layer of transparent wax over it all and polish it carefully. You can make pretty cool things with it but when it comes to realism and detail tempera is always better. Besides, wax has always been far more expensive than eggs. The real conservation problem here is again not so much the paint (as long as you don't hit or heat it) but the support: buildings collapse, wood rots. Afaik, many of Pompeii's wall paintings are in fact encaustics, and so are many of Fayum's portraits.