---
alias: tombs
---
<cite>This overview was written for [Eleanor's Iceberg](http://newsletter.eleanorkonik.com/), a weekly newsletter with my nerdy research into history, infrastructure, and weird science! Please consider signing up & supporting my work.</cite>

> I was looking into the history of religious military orders to use as a basis for the [[biladiyn|paladin-analogues]] in my novel and discovered the Order of the Holy Sepulchre refers to a tomb. So I went down the rabbit hole and discovered... 

## Fun Facts

-   A sepulchre specifically refers to rock-cut room, typically cut into a cave, such as Christ's tomb. 
-   A hypogaeum is an underground tomb, such as the Thebian necropolis. The term is interchangeable with catacomb. 
-   The [[Maya]] used cinnabar to dye the bones of their dead red before interring them.
-   A kurgan (typically associated with [[Scythian]] culture) is a type of burial mound where a single person is buried along with grave vessels, weapons and horses.
-   Many fairies of Celtic lore are traditionally thought to inhabit the ancient barrows and cairns of Ireland.

## Bacteria Destroy Monuments

Although the degradation of monuments and buildings is usually blamed on weather, but some microbes cause deterioration because of how they interact with salt in the air. \[[Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA0OTE3NDAzNDc2MTY5OTgyJmM9azd2NCZiPTQwMzI4NDE1OCZkPXgxazRkOHo=.YIk_67IpbqoynwguJtyZqYzvIMMsBCu2u4npwA3Rpfo)\]

## Vaulted Tombs Collapse

The early [[who the Minoans were and theories for their decline]], on Crete, continued to use their circular vaulted tombs -- called tholos tombs -- even after roof collapse. They apparently buried their dead on top of the fallen stones. ([Read More](http://www.minoancrete.com/yerokambos.htm))

## Lines of Mounds

The [[Scythian|Scythians]] — horse nomads who gave rise to myths of the Amazons — built burial mounds in straight lines on the Eurasian steppes. \[[Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA0OTE3NDAzNDc2MTY5OTgyJmM9azd2NCZiPTQwMzI4NDE2NyZkPWYxeTZ5OXM=.g6UAdiA1v67l02Fpf-ZcAB0PTHiaL3F4rK2vngjTZR8)\]

## Location, Location, Location

Many tombs, including the pyramid tombs of the [[Maya]], are located in, under, or beside religious buildings like temples & churches. \[[Read More](https://click.mailerlite.com/link/c/YT0xNTA0OTE3NDAzNDc2MTY5OTgyJmM9azd2NCZiPTQwMzI4NDE3MCZkPXozZzdlNXo=.bFrkLc_RlfOHTmhvrENhCFjp-tX-TXOasjb7Rh3C3QI)\]

 